# Read Me First #

## For those learning for the first time

The purpose of these lessons is not to teach you how to program. The purpose is
to teach you how to learn. It is not possible to include here (or in any
curriculum) the entirety of computer science. However, there is a point from
which it is possible to reach almost anywhere you want to go. I hope to lead
you there.

This collection is not a tutorial; I am not walking you through making a
specific program or product. I have laid a path with a distant target in mind,
but I also hope to serve those who want to wander off. There will be a fair bit of optional material along the way, and perhaps even some pointers about where
to go next if you want to continue following that idea. But you are always welcome back if you get stuck.

This will not be fast. There is an essentially infinite amount of material, and
I am not one for leaving interesting ideas unmentioned. I am merely offering
this knowledge though. You are free (and perhaps encouraged) to skim the parts
that are less interesting to you. Some of these you may have to come back to,
but others may never come up again in the context of your interests.

Finally, good luck. If you need me, you can reach me at <email>.

## For those who have been around the block

This is my effort to create a curriculum that is comprehensive, untainted with
the rejection and derision of the unknown, and accessible. I aim to avoid any
indication of popular ideas like "Git is hard" or "Javascript is garbage."
Those are easy answers to hard questions about design. They also ingore the
truths of the utility of these tools. For better or for worse, Git and
Javascript are omni-present in our lives. Without proper discussion, we will
not grow and learn from our mistakes.

I hope to provide a separate space for discussion on github. That way, we can
avoid the above without being completely in a bubble.


## FIGURE OUT WHERE TO PUT

I hope to always provide at least some explanation, and more resources if you
want to know more. I hope to never wave my hands and jsutify something with
just "because." I do not want this to be like math.

One of the unfortunate facts about the state of computers right now is that
they are fairly different. The three big players in desktops and laptops are
Microsoft Windows, Apple's OSX or macOS (we are in a transition period), and
Linux. MacOS and Linux share an ancestor, and so they are similar enough that
this intro can cover both of them. Windows is not similar enough that I can
teach all three at once. I will choose macOS/Linux for now, and hopefully add
support for Windows later. Luckily, once we start getting into the meat of
things, the differences will matter less.
